wvlt: The UBC Imager Wavelet Package -- Release 2.1
---------------------------------------------------

Release History
---------------

[Release 2.1]

Contains some minor bug fixes to "wxfrm" and support for compilation under
SunOS 5.x (Solaris) OSes.

[Release 2.0]

THIS IS A MAJOR NEW RELEASE WHICH SHOULD BE CONSIDERED INCOMPATIBLE WITH
PREVIOUS RELEASES.

Pseudocoiflets in previous release had been mislabelled as Coiflets.
Official (Beylkin-Coifman-Rokhlin) coiflets added.

Spline wavelets now belong to a single, consistently-named family.

Corrected offsets of Spline 3,3 wavelet.

Changes order of multidimensional index enumeration to correspond with C
array declaration syntax.

Supports "nonstandard" (Beylkin-Coifman-Rokhlin) multidimensional transforms.

Adds new "ppmwthresh" image thresholding demonstration program.  (Note that
while it shows the result of wavelet compression, it does *not* compress the
image files themselves.)

Improves performance of the multidimensional wavelet transform.

Operates on both single and double precision arrays.  (The function names
have changed to reflect this.)

Compiles under HP-UX, DOS/Turbo-C, and (library only) Macintosh.  (Thanks to
John Burrell (johnb@whio.grace.cri.nz) and Ken Turkowski
(Ken_Turkowski@quickmail.apple.com) for porting assistance.)

[Release 1.3]

Adds an explanatory README file (you're reading it now).

[Release 1.2]

Removes some spurious dependencies from the library Makefile.

[Release 1.1]

Adds a couple of minor bug fixes: Correcting a typo from Daubechies's book
and allowing for the variable location of the "perl" executable on the
user's system.

[Release 1.0]

This is the first release of the UBC Imager Wavelet Package: a set of tools
that perform the basic wavelet operations: forward and inverse transformation
and refinement.

Contents
--------

If you're reading this file, you've probably already "unshar"ed (under UNIX)
or "(pk)unzip"ed" (under DOS) the release file.  This created a directory
named either "wvlt/r2_0" (using the UNIX directory notation) with this
README file and five or six subdirectories:

	lib
		library containing all of the wavelet functions

	ppmwthresh (ppmwthre on DOS)
		binary demonstrating wavelet image compression

	wxfrm
		binary for wavelet forward and inverse transforms

	wrefine
		binary for wavelet refinement

	exe (DOS only)
		DOS executable versions of the above binaries

	demos
		various wavelet demonstration scripts

The "wxfrm" and "wrefine" binaries are little more than front ends to the
library.  Both are designed to read and write ordinary ASCII files.

"ppmwthresh" reads and writes Jef Poskanzer's "PPM" image format.  As
mentioned above, it does *not* create compressed image files (i.e., its
output is not sparse), but it shows the result of compressing an image by
setting a certain number of wavelet coefficients to zero before
reconstructing.

You can find the command line options for any of the binaries by running it
with the single command line argument "'-?'" (the single quotes are
important under UNIX).  For instance, to find the options for "wxfrm", enter

	% wxfrm '-?'

UNIX Compilation
----------------

To compile the source code on an IBM, SGI, or HP UNIX platform, be sure
you're in "wvlt/r2_0" and enter

	% make ARCH={arch}

where {arch} is one of the supported machine architectures: "IBM", "SGI", or
"HP".  On SGIs, you may need to use GNU make ("gmake") instead of the usual
"/bin/make".

On Sun 4 platforms, because of significant differences between SunOS Release
4.x and SunOS Release 5.x (aka "Solaris"), you need to indicate the major
operating system release number as well:

	% make ARCH=SUN4 OSREL_MAJOR={val}

where {val} is either "4" for SunOS 4.x or "5" for SunOS 5.x releases.

(There's nothing very architecture-specific in any of the code, so it may
work fine on other architectures.)

This will compile the library "libwvlt.a" and then compile and link the
three binaries.  Place these binaries somewhere in your $PATH.

DOS-Turbo C Compilation
-----------------------

Although the DOS release includes binaries of the demo programs, you can
remake them if you have Borland Turbo C installed on your system.  More
importantly, this will also compile and build the wavelet library "wvlt.lib".

To compile the source code for a DOS platform with Turbo C installed, be
sure you're in "wvlt/r2_0" and enter

	> make -fmakefile.tc

The binaries provided have been compiled with a (dated) 16-bit Turbo C
compiler.  This will cause memory problems if they are given large arrays or
(in the case of ppmwthresh) even moderately-sized images.

Demonstrations
--------------

Once the binaries are installed, there are several demonstration scripts in
the "demos" subdirectory.  To use these, you must have "perl" and "gnuplot"
installed on your system.

The individual files are:

genvector
	This perl script generates a vector used by the other utilities.  You
	may optionally modify the first line to indicate where perl is installed
	on your system (often "/bin/perl"), but the other demos do not depend on
	this.

plotlevels {flag} {title}
	shows several levels of an approximately-centered wavelet function.
	"{flag}" specifies a wavelet basis.  (Use "wxfrm '-?'" to get a list.)
	It always defaults to the Haar ("-H") basis.  {title} is a title for the
	plot.  It defaults to {flag}.

plotsmoothing {i} {n}
	shows the {i}th (default: 16) smoothing basis for a vector of length {n}
	(default: 32).  (The vector is always refined to a length of 256.)

plotwavelets {i} {n}
	shows the {i}th (default: 24) wavelet basis for a vector of length {n}
	(default: 256).

plotwrefine {file}
	shows the result of refining (depending on the basis, this means
	interpolation) by a factor of 8 the 1-dimensional data in {file}
	(default: standard input).  The test files "ramp16.dat" (a 16-value
	ramp), "linearlt.dat" (one row of ray-traced output), and
	"realvideo.dat" (one row of real video) are included.

plotwxfrmmag {file}
	plots the absolute values of the wavelet transform coefficients of
	the 1-dimensional data in {file} in decreasing order.  The same test
	files for "plotwrefine" work here.

All of the plot* files are (Bourne) shell scripts, so they may not be very
useful under DOS.  Of course, their names are truncated to 8 characters
under DOS.

Linking to the Library
----------------------

You are free to include "lib/wvlt.h" and link your own code with
"lib/libwvlt.a" (UNIX) or "lib/wvlt.lib" (DOS).  There are manual pages
"wxfrm.3" and "wrefine.3" and their corresponding PostScript file "wvlt.ps"
describing the library in the "lib" subdirectory, and the sources for
"ppmwthresh", "wxfrm", and "wrefine" provide examples.

Disclaimer
----------

Bob Lewis produced this package and hereby releases it to the public
domain.  Neither the author nor the University of British Columbia will be
held responsible for its use, misuse, or abuse or any damages arising from
same.

Any comments regarding this package may, nevertheless, be sent to
"bobl@cs.ubc.ca".
